---
layout: post
title: "Re-walk the path of Niels Bohr"
author: Wang Xu
---

I feel rather like Bohr, when calculating the Lennard Jones potential. Bohr had to put up with an orbital theory with quantized energy levels just in order to explain the atomic reflection spectra. Here we had to approximate the atomic interactions, reduce the forms and then what, "cutoff" the tail and assume a finite repeating unit? I thought we have immense power witht the modern computers.

# There is no perfection in science, only keep going forward

We realize that Lennard Jones used more than 30 pages and 50 deductions to come up with an approximation, that can fit gas interaction within a broad range of temperatures by less than 1 percent of variation. In addition, it illustrates how atomic distance affects potential. I don't have a single clue how to realize his deductions on a computer.
The reduced form of LJ potential reads like this:
$$ 	U^*\left(r_{ij} \right) = 4 \left[\left(\frac{1}{r^*_{ij}}\right)^{12} -\left(\frac{1}{r^*_{ij}}\right)^{6} \right] $$
So I start to appreciate the beauty of such a reduced form of atomic potential and find it simply illuminating! With negative sign indicating the attraction and the positive sign indicating repulsion, and the distance at the denominator position, the equation beautifully illustrates:
1. when two atoms / particles are far apart, their interaction is minimized by the power of 6 and 12, and hence largely approximates to 0.
2. when the two atoms move closer, attraction increases faster than repulsion, hence a slight dip of the system potential.
3. One can imagine repulsion term will gain speed and catch up with the attraction at some point.
4. There is a critical point where the net repulsion and net attraction equal each other and the net potential between the two particles equals 0. I would think Debye length is a good equal for such a distance, though proposed in a different system.
After all, I want to solve the mystery of atomic and molecular systems. We should embrace whatever tool available.

# Cutoff is not for fun, but to make life easier

One can't be satisfied with just two particles. There is a universe of molecules to study! Now to embark on the journey, we need to have a whole picture of what is being studied.
If we consider 10 particles and their pairwise interactions (which is a confined, arbitrary and over-simplified system) we will have the following unique pairwise interactions:
    Particle 1 will interact with particles 2-10, making it 9 interactions;
    Particle 2 will interact with particles 3-10, making it 8 interactions;
    so on and so forth, and the total number of interactions can be calculated as: 9 + 8 + 7 + ... + 1 = 45 interactions.

For 100 particles, the equation can be similarly written as 99 + 98 + 97 + ... + 2 + 1 = 4950 interactions. Hei, Gauss solved it 300 years ago! Maybe we should be born earlier than him? ---quote by Gil Strand.
For 1000 particles, similar extrapolation can be made as: 999 + 998 + 997 + ... + 2 + 1 = 499500 interactions.
Hence a more scientificly appealing way to address the general format of pairwise particle interactions for n particles is:
$$ 	N\left(n \right) = \frac{n * \left(n - 1\right)}{2} $$

Do we seriously need to take all the universe of particle interactions into account? From the Lennard Jones approximation, one can easily figure out that is probably unecessary. Two particles, at free motion, can be extremely repulsive when they are close to each other. Imagine a unit density of 1 particle / unit volume, in any given sphere with a radius r, the volume of the sphere will be
$$ 	V\left(r \right) = \frac{4 * \pi * r^3}{3} $$
And the number of particles within the volume is:
$$ 	N\left(r \right) = \rho * \frac{4 * pi * r^3}{3} $$

For a radius of 1, N of particles is: 4
For a radius of 2, N of particles is: 33
For a radius of 5, N of particles is: 523
so on and so forth.

Now with all of the above thoughts, one should be able to come up with a hypotheis:
it is unecessary to account for all the particle interactions, given their repulsion and density. It will be such an enormous amount of calculation that even the most powerful computer is dwarfed.
The benefits of truncating unecessary interactions are: Reduce the cost of computation. Save time of effort.
But on the other hand, the associated risks are: The method is less accurate. It might affect the final result. We need to be unscientific to move forward scientifically.

# Re-walk the path of Bohr
Bohr would've wanted to come up with a electron probability model, instead of the quantized orbital model, if he's offered further experimental data.
I would've asked the computer to just keep calculating, especially after truncating a whole bunch of interactions. But it's still too much to compute.

Yet another approximation is here for science. Intuitively, we can assume that if all the particles are randomly distributed (of course not in reality), after a large enough space is given, whatever particle movement inside the space should not affect the adjacent space (and certainly not the case, especially at the interface). I have to admit this part I'm not 100% satisfied. I wish to imagine these spaces / boxes like unit cell of crystal lattice, but with no fixed covalent bonding it's hard to imagine how uniform the spaces can be.

Just to answer the questions:
    Given periodic boundary, and assume that all boxes are identical and are smallest repeating units, the max distance in each dimension is (Box-length / 2). Reason is if the max distance is larger than (Box-length / 2), one can always refer to the adjacent box with a same particle but closer distance than half box length.
    And certainly between two particles at ((0, 0, 0), (0, 0, 8)), given a Box-length of 10, the actual distance between the two particles is (Box-length - 8) = 2. The intriguing questions is, can we shift infinite amount of boxes and still represent the same interaction? Are they really the same two particles? My guess is not.

I have some answers to the question, but more remain mysterious.
I guess I'm just re-walking Bohr's old path. Hopefully one day the fog will be gone.