---
layout: post
title: "A principle of indeterminacy"
author: Wang Xu
---

2 weeks, a short phrase to speak of, but such a long time to pass by.

When Werner Heisenberg worked with Bohr, he probably went through some hardest time of his academic career, so bad that he had to shelter in an isolated island for two weeks. It was not unfruitful time. He came back with a substantial mathematical expansion of the electron mechanics, the principle of indeterminacy.

Likewise, the 2-week bootcamp was certainly not an unfruitful time for the modern Berkeley MSSE fellas either. But alas, this author has not experienced such a long, intensive and brain-crushing time over the past five years. Before embarking on the journey, one would imagine a little introduction to python, some practice labs, then a little introduction to a new language. Nothing more crazy than a good afternoon's sports. It is certainly with great devotion that both instructors tried very hard to pass nearly all practical theoretical chemistry related programming onto the students. I almost admire their dedication.

Now there are two not-so-philosophical questions remaining, and I will elaborate on them below.

## Is python better or C++ better for computational chemistry / biology
My answer to this question will be very subjective. I'm interested in one subject: to create an electronic human being with all necessary biological molecules, pathways and functions. In order to elaborate on this topic and the approach, let's drill down to the smallest constituent of the grand species, a single mammalian cell.
No matter how complicated a cell is, how ignorant we are towards understanding it, some math don't lie. Assume a cell is roughly the shape of a square brick with the size of 10 $\mu$ m * 10 $\mu$ m * 1 $\mu$ m. That brings us to a volume of 1*10^(-13) L. Try the case of a common biological analyte of interest, say cystein. It has been measured extensively and estimated to exhibit in the range of 100 $\mu$ mol/L. Hence in one cell there will be 

1 * 10^(-13) L * 100 $\mu$ mol/L * 6.022 * 10^(23) particles/mol = 6.022 * 10^(6) molecules

A big number, but certainly not unattainable with the development of modern computational power. Now to calculate through all the 6 million molecules for once, we will perform 6 million iterations. We have run a fairly great comparison on the calculation speeds between python and C++ in assignment 3. The result is astonishing and the gap is huge:

Program | Python version estimate pi | C++ version estimate pi no optimization | C++ version estimate pi aggressive optimization |
---------|----------|----------|-------------------------------------------------|
  Time  | average 4.478s  | average 0.813s  | average 0.090s

For a simple Monte Carlo estimation of pi, the time difference between python and C++ can be as big as 50 folds. If we extrapolate the simulation to cover 6 million cysteine molecules in 37.2 trillion cells, and consider the complexity of modeling a polar amino acid in an aqueous environment, the timing could be as big as trillions folds different. To my immature thoughts, there is in fact no room for python to function in such a realm.

## What's the benefit of python then?
One might argue that all the calculations above are bullshit. First, not all the cysteine molecules are in the same states. Some are labile in the matrix, some are bound to various species and hence exposed to drastically different environments, some cysteine might not be cysteine in the next mili-second because they are just oxidized, some immune cells exhibit far more cysteine than the others, etc. The calculation involved is simply beyond imagination. No matter C++ or python would not give any meaningful result by whatever means. Instead of crunching the numbers, it might be beneficial to think clever on the biology side and come up with really smart algorithms to largely simulate the biological phenomena. 

One good example came from the Human Genome Project, in which almost every scientist would choose to sequence the genome by isolating them from cells and run orthogonal base-by-base sequencing. One guy chose a different path. Craig Venter probably learned from Monte Carlo method. He randomly cleaved gene sequences and studied them. He noticed some pieces certainly share the same sequence and they are likely from the same origin. Through this randomized sequencing approach, Craig became the first scientist to crack the Human Genome, beating a collective international effort. Such achievement illustrates the necessity to fully utilize human brains instead of relying solely on computers. Although Python might not be as computationally powerful as C++, its vast flexibility and scientific libraries can be a true plus to biological research.

## A principle of indeterminacy
If we're faced with the question again, which language would you pick for your quest, Python or C++? It's probably hard and I'll dive deeper into both of them to make a less naive judgement. For now, it remains indeterminable.

Now the second not-so-philosophical question: if you knew the bootcamp would be so intensive, would you pick it again?

I guess I'll walk the journey again!

Maybe~